docs/building.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: "Building Cardinal3D"
permalink: /build/
---

# Building Cardinal3D


To get a copy of the codebase, see [Git Setup](git).

Note: the first build on any platform will be very slow, as it must compile most dependencies. Subsequent builds will only need to re-compile your edited Cardinal3D code.

### Linux 

The following packages (ubuntu/debian) are required, as well as CMake and either gcc or clang:
```
sudo apt install pkg-config libgtk-3-dev libsdl2-dev
```

The version of CMake packaged with apt may be too old (we are using the latest version). If this is the case, you can install the latest version through pip:
```
pip install cmake
export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/bin
```

Finally, to build the project:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo .. 
make -j4
```

The same process should also work modified for your distro/package manager of choice. Note that if you are using Wayland, you may need to set the environment variable ``SDL_VIDEODRIVER=wayland`` when running ``Cardinal3D`` for acceptable performance.

Notes:
- You can instead use ``cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..`` to build in debug mode, which, while far slower, makes the debugging experience much more intuitive.
- You can replace ``4`` with the number of build processes to run in parallel (set to the number of cores in your machine for maximum utilization).
- If you have both gcc and clang installed and want to build with clang, you should run ``CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake ..`` instead.
- Since our codebase uses new features in c++17, you need to have g++ version >= 7 to compile it.

### Windows

The windows build is easiest to set up using the Visual Studio compiler (for now). To get the compiler, download and install the Visual Studio 2019 Build Tools [here](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#build-tools-for-visual-studio-2019). If you want to instead use the full Visual Studio IDE, you can download Visual Studio Community 2019 [here](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/). Be sure to install the "Desktop development with C++" component.

You can download CMake for windows [here](https://cmake.org/download/).

Once the Visual Studio compiler (MSVC) is installed, you can access it by running "Developer Command Prompt for VS 2019," which opens a terminal with the utilities in scope. The compiler is called ``cl``. You can also import these utilities in any terminal session by running the script installed at ``C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvars64.bat``. 

We also provide a simple script, ``build_win.bat``, that will automatically import the compiler and build the project. You should be able to simply run it in the project root to build. ``Cardinal3D.exe`` will be generated under ``build/RelWithDebInfo/``.

If you want to build manually, the steps (assuming MSVC is in scope) are:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
cmake --build . --config RelWithDebInfo
```

You can also use ``--config Debug`` to build in debug mode, which, while far slower, makes the debugging experience much more intuitive. If you swap this, be sure to make a new build directory for it.

Finally, also note that ``cmake ..`` generates a Visual Studio solution file in the current directory. You can open this solution (``Cardinal3D.sln``) in Visual Studio itself and use its interface to build, run, and debug the project. (Using the Visual Studio debugger or the provided VSCode launch options for debugging is highly recommended.)

### MacOS

The following packages are required, as well as CMake and clang. You can install them with [homebrew](https://brew.sh/):
```
brew install pkg-config sdl2
```

To build the project:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo .. 
make -j4
```

Notes:
- You can instead use ``cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..`` to build in debug mode, which, while far slower, makes the debugging experience much more intuitive.
- You can replace ``4`` with the number of build processes to run in parallel (set to the number of cores in your machine for maximum utilization).

### Remote server
Currently, Cardinal3D cannot be built on either Rice or Myth server, due to the c++17 features (both servers only support g++-5). We are in contact with the admins of Myth and will update the progress on piazza. If you encounter issues building Cardinal3D locally, please post on piazza or come to OH.

Commit message:

update building doc on remote server

docs/building.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: "Building Cardinal3D"
permalink: /build/
---

# Building Cardinal3D


To get a copy of the codebase, see [Git Setup](git).

Note: the first build on any platform will be very slow, as it must compile most dependencies. Subsequent builds will only need to re-compile your edited Cardinal3D code.

### Linux 

The following packages (ubuntu/debian) are required, as well as CMake and either gcc or clang:
```
sudo apt install pkg-config libgtk-3-dev libsdl2-dev
```

The version of CMake packaged with apt may be too old (we are using the latest version). If this is the case, you can install the latest version through pip:
```
pip install cmake
export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/bin
```

Finally, to build the project:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo .. 
make -j4
```

The same process should also work modified for your distro/package manager of choice. Note that if you are using Wayland, you may need to set the environment variable ``SDL_VIDEODRIVER=wayland`` when running ``Cardinal3D`` for acceptable performance.

Notes:
- You can instead use ``cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..`` to build in debug mode, which, while far slower, makes the debugging experience much more intuitive.
- You can replace ``4`` with the number of build processes to run in parallel (set to the number of cores in your machine for maximum utilization).
- If you have both gcc and clang installed and want to build with clang, you should run ``CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake ..`` instead.
- Since our codebase uses new features in c++17, you need to have g++ version >= 7 to compile it. You can run ``CC=gcc-7 CXX=g++-7 cmake ..``. 

### Windows

The windows build is easiest to set up using the Visual Studio compiler (for now). To get the compiler, download and install the Visual Studio 2019 Build Tools [here](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#build-tools-for-visual-studio-2019). If you want to instead use the full Visual Studio IDE, you can download Visual Studio Community 2019 [here](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/). Be sure to install the "Desktop development with C++" component.

You can download CMake for windows [here](https://cmake.org/download/).

Once the Visual Studio compiler (MSVC) is installed, you can access it by running "Developer Command Prompt for VS 2019," which opens a terminal with the utilities in scope. The compiler is called ``cl``. You can also import these utilities in any terminal session by running the script installed at ``C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvars64.bat``. 

We also provide a simple script, ``build_win.bat``, that will automatically import the compiler and build the project. You should be able to simply run it in the project root to build. ``Cardinal3D.exe`` will be generated under ``build/RelWithDebInfo/``.

If you want to build manually, the steps (assuming MSVC is in scope) are:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
cmake --build . --config RelWithDebInfo
```

You can also use ``--config Debug`` to build in debug mode, which, while far slower, makes the debugging experience much more intuitive. If you swap this, be sure to make a new build directory for it.

Finally, also note that ``cmake ..`` generates a Visual Studio solution file in the current directory. You can open this solution (``Cardinal3D.sln``) in Visual Studio itself and use its interface to build, run, and debug the project. (Using the Visual Studio debugger or the provided VSCode launch options for debugging is highly recommended.)

### MacOS

The following packages are required, as well as CMake and clang. You can install them with [homebrew](https://brew.sh/):
```
brew install pkg-config sdl2
```

To build the project:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo .. 
make -j4
```

Notes:
- You can instead use ``cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..`` to build in debug mode, which, while far slower, makes the debugging experience much more intuitive.
- You can replace ``4`` with the number of build processes to run in parallel (set to the number of cores in your machine for maximum utilization).

### Remote server
Currently, Cardinal3D can only be built on Myth server, due to the c++17 features (Rice server only supports g++-5). 
First install latest CMake locally and create an alias for it 
```
pip install cmake --user
alias cmake=~/.local/bin/cmake
```
Then create the build folder and run the following command to use g++-7.  
```
CC=gcc-7 CXX=g++-7 cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo ..
```
